[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations."
Welcome to our beautiful
Los Angeles studio.
So would you like
to reduce anxiety
by doing 12 minutes of
brain exercises a day
or would you like to
lose weight by doing
13 minutes of guided
meditation a day?
Or did you know that
you can actually
damage your brain with
too much negativity?
These and more studies are based
on new brain scan research done
at the University of
Pennsylvania's Center
for Spirituality and the Mind.
And joining me is one
of the leading experts
on spirituality, communication,
stress reduction,
and the brain, Mark
Robert Waldman.
He also has a new
book out called
"How Words Can
Change Your Brain."
Thank you so much
for being here.
>>MARK WALDMAN: I'm
delighted to be here.
Thank you.
>>LISA: I am so looking
forward to this conversation
because we're going
to get to see images
that we don't usually get
to see as a regular public.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
This is actually the very
first time on any television
where I've put together
some of the actual images
to show you what the
brain really looks like.
And you have to take all of your
ideas about what the brain used
to be, how you
thought it functioned,
even the notion
of structure, you
have to throw entirely out of
the window when you see this.
>>LISA: I love that.
Oh, I love that.
And thank you for
doing this for us.
>>WALDMAN: You're welcome.
>>LISA: This is
going to be great.
So tell me what is
the one word that
is the most negative word that
damages our brain out there?
>>WALDMAN: What we have found
to be the most powerful and most
dangerous word as far as
your brain is concerned,
if I was to put you into
a brain scan machine
and flash this word for
less than one second,
you won't even know
that you've seen it,
it's going to release so
many stress neural chemicals
that they can actually damage
specific neurons in the brain.
And the word is "no!"
>>LISA: Oh, you just
damaged my brain.
>>WALDMAN: I just
damaged your brain.
And the more you
repeat negative words,
and even saying "I don't
know if I like the idea,"
we have research that has
been collected, for example
from Barbara Frederickson,
that if you have
one negative word and three
positive words going on
within a conversation
within a particular minute,
so you can create like
a positivity ratio,
if your positivity ratio
falls below 3 to 1,
you'll permanently damage
your relationships,
you'll undermine the
company structure.
But if you can push
that positivity ratio,
if you can have five, six, seven
positive words and expressions
for each negative word or
expression and a slight frown,
is all you need to trigger
that stressful reaction
in your brain.
But when you get that up to
that 5 to 1 positivity ratio,
those are the relationships that
last the longest and those are
the companies that
actually soar.
>>LISA: Oh, isn't
that interesting.
So in your marketing--
or what about parenting,
if you're saying no, don't, not?
>>WALDMAN: Well, understand
that a young child
is very impulsive.
And we have what's a
called motivational center
in the brain.
And we want to go
after anything that's
new or different or
pleasurable or exciting.
So a kid is just
going to-- their ball
will run into the street.
And they just want to go after
that ball and that's dangerous.
And so we yell, no!
And every one of
you who just heard
that, I'm sure you felt a
slight tightening in your body.
That turns off the motivational
center in the brain.
That stimulates the fear
circuit in the brain.
That sends out a different
set of the neurochemicals that
literally stop you from moving
and make you turn around
and run in the other direction.
>>LISA: That's so interesting.
So we're going to look at a
lot of this on the screen--
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: --so we can see
what this looks like.
So tell me what this
first image looks like?
It's spectacular in color.
What are we looking at?
>>WALDMAN: Now, color doesn't
really exist in the brain.
But there's a new project called
the Human Connectome Project.
And what we're doing--
it's the same thing
that the geneticists
did in terms
of mapping out the
human genome system.
But with the human brain,
you've got 85 billion neurons,
you have 85 billion glial cells.
I'll talk about those
a little bit later.
But what you are
actually seeing here
is that you need to understand
that a single neuron
in our frontal lobes where our
thought processes take place,
where my imagination
takes place, where
my decision-making
process take place,
these neurons can
send connections
all the way back to the
brain, to the furtherest back.
So what you are
actually seeing is
all of the connections that
take place in your frontal lobes
where consciousness
actually exists
and how it spreads back
through the rest of your brain.
And this is only a partial view
of how many connections there
are.
A single neuron can
make connections
with 10,000 other neurons
at one particular time.
So this means that there is
no one part of the brain.
Years ago, you see
a model and they
would call this your visual
cortex and your parietal lobe.
These are arbitrary lines.
But if neurons are
interconnecting
and interweaving and flowing,
where do you divide the line?
Where does this frontal lobe end
and your visual cortex begin?
It all blurs together.
So we have to understand
that this is a interconnected
system that has no
beginning or end.
Every part is constantly
interacting and communicating
with every other part.
>>LISA: So when people talk
about quadrants of the brain
and the frontal lobe
and so forth, it's--
>>WALDMAN: Made up language.
>>LISA: Really?
It's like to say, well, we
have to talk about-- well,
there is this
particular area where
we notice that
consciousness begins.
And they'll call it the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
And you have to
figure out that that
goes into the frontal lobes or
up into this particular point
right here.
But it's better to
see these new images.
>>LISA: So this image
that we're looking at here
is from the brain
imaging center.
And this is the
center that you were
talking about that created these
different types of graphics.
>>WALDMAN: So why I want to show
you this is that in the past
there has been a rumor--
it's never been true.
There's never been right
brain thinking and left brain
thinking.
There's always
interhemispheric dialogue
going on at both times.
And what you are actually
seeing are the connections
that go from one side
of the hemisphere
through the center part of your
brain, over to the other side.
So again, there is this constant
dialogue and communication
going back and forth
instantaneously
between the front
side of your brain
and the back side of your
brain, between the left side
of your brain and the
right side of your brain.
You do have two completely
separate hemispheres.
And each one looks at the
world in a different way.
But they're also
dialogueing with each other
all the time to create
a unified picture
of the world we think we see.
>>LISA: Interesting.
All right.
So we've heard of the
language center of the brain
and areas of the brain that
are responsible for emotions
and communication.
>>WALDMAN: And
we're just beginning
to map out some of
the primary emotions.
And there are very
specific circuits.
You know what causes
us to be afraid,
and what causes us
to be angry, and what
causes us to feel loving
and nurturing, each of these
have now have been identified
as specific brain circuits.
But they take place
in the lower part
of our brain, where I can't even
show you many pictures of this
because we don't have
brain scan technology
to go down that deep.
But what happens is that
our primary emotions never
make it into consciousness.
Something else makes
it into consciousness.
And then we create a picture
of an emotional experience
that we've just had.
And so normally what
psychologists call emotions,
I'm going to call feelings.
And feelings aren't real.
So when I'm feeling happy
and I'm feeling sad,
this is taking place
between one to 10 seconds
after I've had an emotional
experience of either pleasure
or pain.
The lower part of the
brain is very simple.
It's either pleasant
or it's unpleasant.
But then that frontal
lobe consciousness
and all those
connections that you
saw in that first part
of that image over there,
it's translating that feeling.
It's pulling up old
memories from the past.
It's associating it
with old feelings
that we've had in the
past and projecting it
onto what might
happen in the future.
Our frontal lobe
consciousness never even
lives in the present moment.
>>LISA: So where exactly
does consciousness
live in the brain?
Is it located in the brain?
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
We now know where it
exists, and how it emerges,
and where comes from.
It's true for all mammals
and probably all animals.
Most neuroscientists--
there's even
been a declaration
signed that we
have to consider
that all animals have
a form of consciousness similar
to what you and I have right
now.
And what happens--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WALDMAN: --in this lower
part of the brain, when
we feel something that creates
a pleasurable sensation,
and that can be
something that's new,
something that's
different, something
that arouses our curiosity,
something that smells sweet,
looks aesthetic or beautiful,
and this releases dopamine
from a little tiny structure
called a nucleus accumbens.
And it releases dopamine in
the lower part of the brain.
And guess where it all goes?
Right up there into
the frontal lobes.
And this is what wakes you up.
And if you take your
little tiny fingernails
on your little tiny pinkie and
put one above each eye right
here, this is the
everyday consciousness
that you and I are
living in right now
and that every viewer
watching this is operating on.
And it's almost a habitual
form of consciousness.
It's not very aware.
We are just processing and
we think we're seeing things
and we're paying--
>>LISA: We're awake.
>>WALDMAN: --attention
to our words.
We're awake.
We're conscious.
And this is something
that all animals have.
>>LISA: And is that also what
they call the alpha state?
>>WALDMAN: We have to throw away
all of the EEG readings, which
only read the outermost
layer of the skull.
We now know there's over 52
different types of brain wave
activities going on and they
change with every thought
and feeling we have, second
to second to second to second.
So you maybe have an alpha
functioning going over here,
delta here,--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>WALDMAN: --gamma in
the back over here--
>>LISA: Oh.
>>WALDMAN: --dissociative
brain waves down here.
And we're abandoning
the EEG models
to understand more about
how these neurons begin
to become active or deactivated
during different thought
process and experiences
that we have.
>>LISA: That's fascinating.
So when we are talking
about accessing
higher states of consciousness--
>>WALDMAN: Ah, yes.
>>LISA: --is that
we're accessing or--
>>WALDMAN: No.
We're not.
>>LISA: --increasing the levels
in our prefrontal cortex?
No.
>>WALDMAN: Right
now, you are not
in a higher state
of consciousness.
I'm not in a higher
state of consciousness.
There's not a listener
or a viewer out there
that's in a higher state
of consciousness right now.
>>LISA: Because?
>>WALDMAN: Because this
is ordinary processing
of information coming
in about the world
just to make sure
that we survive.
So I remain standing up.
So I organize my words in such a
way that you can understand it.
This is nothing unusual.
But we have found--
because what we're
famous for is that
Andy Newberg and I,
we've done the brain scan
studies of nuns, and Buddhists,
and Pentecostals
speaking in tongues,
and atheists praying to God,
and people doing affirmations.
And what we find out is that
there are specific processes
and activities that you can do.
And when you have the person
in a brain scan machine,
you begin to see that these
two tiny areas of consciousness
begin to expand and grow.
You begin to bring online
more parts of frontal lobe
functioning that
increases your awareness.
And this awareness is
outside of words or language.
So the book that I wrote,
"Words Can Change Your Brain,"
the interesting thing is
that of the eight most
essential elements
of communication,
words are number eight.
>>LISA: Oh, that's
so fascinating.
So we're taking a look here at
the frontal limbic filters--
fibers-- that we were
talking about here.
So the states of consciousness
that you're saying
exist in a meditative state.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>WALDMAN: Now, this slide
is particularly important
because here you see
everyday consciousness.
And the moment you hold that
negative thought, the moment
you heard the word
"no," or I say,
"oh, I don't feel
good this morning,"
even if you're making
it up, this information
gets sent into deeper
brain structures that
activate a warning signal,
like in the amygdala.
So the moment you have
an imaginary fantasy
thought-- I'm worried about
what will happen tomorrow--
what happens is that
the rest of the brain
says this is happening today.
Put out an alarm.
Stop yourself.
So this stops you
from being motivated.
It turns off the
reward centers and that
shuts down consciousness.
So this is the coolest
thing in neuroscience.
Every negative thought
and feeling you have
interferes with the
process of you solving
any problem that's
about to come up.
>>LISA: So when someone
says be in present time,
where you're not being attacked
or in fear or the negative
experience is not happening
at this very moment,--
>>WALDMAN: You have to train it.
>>LISA: --that actually
allows you to--
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: --get to the next moment
with some cognitive processing.
>>WALDMAN: And it's very
easy to train your brain
to come into the present moment.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>WALDMAN: But this feels
very unusual to do so.
>>LISA: I mean this makes
so much sense when you're
trying to problem solve,
when you're stuck in grief,
if you're in pain.
If you stick with
the present moment
and realize that
that is not happening
in that present moment, it will
give you the cognitive ability
to help solve the next moment.
>>WALDMAN: Let's
give the viewers
an actual sense of how you
can change your consciousness
literally in 60 seconds.
>>LISA: OK.
Oh, I know what this is.
>>WALDMAN: OK.
Now in our previous
book, "How God
Changes Your Brain" we found
that the fastest way to relax
is to yawn.
And I have 43 documented studies
to show that yawning actually
lights up your frontal lobes
and other parts of your brain
that are involved
with consciousness.
But if everybody was to just
take a moment and just yawn.
And if you just move
around in slow motion
and even take your
hands and begin
to touch your hands or your
face, in pleasurable moments,
you need to remember that
pleasure for the lower brain
is what motivates us to
take action in the world.
So just doing something
for a few seconds,--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WALDMAN: --breathing,
relaxing, creating
some pleasure, this
is releasing dopamine.
This brings you into
the present moment.
It feels really good.
Your brain wants more of it.
So it's very practical.
We can now apply this to a
very stressful work situation.
Work as hard as
you possibly can.
But when the moment you begin
to feel some stress, which
is those neurochemicals
shutting down
the motivational center of
your brain, then take a moment,
take a few deep breaths,
do something pleasurable,
go give yourself a hug or get
a hug from somebody that you
like, do anything that gives you
a momentary sense of pleasure.
This literally
refreshes your brain.
You get a burst of dopamine.
This is the best
drug in your brain.
And that's absolutely free.
It wakes up consciousness.
You can then go back into
work and work harder,
have higher productivity
with less stress.
>>LISA: Well taking this
to another level though,
isn't simulating those pleasure
centers of brain, stimulated.
And dopamine is
released by things
like buying something new,--
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: --shiny objects,--
>>WALDMAN: Oh, God, yes.
>>LISA: --possibly pornography.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: These types of
things stimulate and release
the dopamine in the
brain, don't they?
Is that why there
are shopaholics?
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
This is the interesting
thing about the reward
system of the brain.
We know that the three
most powerful images
for human beings, first
of all are loving images.
Somebody hugging,
kissing, erotic images.
It doesn't matter whether
you're aware of it or not.
This stimulates your
lower brain into action.
It simply wants more of it.
The other one is whatever
your favorite comfort food is.
This really lights up the
lower centers of your brain.
And then the third
one is, if I show you
a picture of a single coin
for one fifth of a second
while you're in a
brain scan machine,
whatever activity
you're doing, you'll
do with more power and force.
And these are university
documented research studies.
So money, it turns out, is
unique for human beings.
The thought of wealth
drives us to work harder.
It's a pleasure center to
the lower part of our brain.
But understand
that pleasure, this
is just a momentary
form of happiness.
There are other
levels of happiness
that transcend this basic
survival oriented thing.
So when you think about
peace, or integrity, or think
of whatever your most sacred--
>>LISA: Happiness.
>>WALDMAN: --your most
sacred word would be,
the things that you
desire most in life.
These are very high,
abstract nouns and concepts.
If we can visualize what peace
looks like, what it feels like,
then the motivational
centers of the brain
will begin to build models.
And then we can use
our conscious minds
to design strategies to get
more, and more, and more of it.
I call the motivational center
of the brain the M-drive
or the desire to acquire more.
Because all mammalian
brains, no matter--
we get a little bit of
pleasure, you want more,
and, more, and more.
And that comes to addiction.
If too much dopamine
gets released,
your behavior becomes
impulsive and then
you can't stop doing it.
We could take probes
and put them right down
into the nucleus
accumbens, the center
of your M-drive, your
motivational drive.
And when we fire
them, whether it's
a rat brain or human
brain, you just literally
feel like jumping out of your
chair and going for something.
You might not even
know what it is.
>>LISA: But that
makes so much sense.
That's why movies that
stimulate those types of centers
in the brain are so popular.
Does it also have
to do with violence?
Does violence stimulate that
survivalistic part of the brain
as well?
>>WALDMAN: No.
It does the exact opposite.
So for example, here we're
talking about perhaps too
much dopamine being released.
But some of us might
be dopamine deficient.
And if we don't have enough
dopamine being released,--
>>LISA: Un-huh.
>>WALDMAN: --we're going to feel
anxious, worried, depressed.
We're not going to feel
like getting out of bed.
Again, we can
reverse engineer all
of these spiritual meditation
strategies that we have.
And if you build--
if you consciously
choose to build pleasure
into your life every 20
or 30 or 40 minutes,
you'll pull yourself out
the depression faster than
any pharmaceutical drug
on the market.
>>LISA: We mentioned that
at the beginning of the show
with 12 minutes of, as you
said, building pleasure
into the prefrontal cortex
of the brain, right?
>>WALDMAN: You want
to become aware
of the pleasure that's already
happening in your lower brain.
And again, anything
new that's different,
that's curious, that's shiny--
you put a mouse in a maze
and you put all kinds of odd,
unusual objects in the maze,
that mouse, out of curiosity,
is going to go explore.
And then it's going
to do something else.
It's going to gather
it and it's going
to hoard it off in a
corner of the maze.
So all mammalian
brains have a sense
that something new may
be potentially useful
in the future to solve a
problem that we haven't even
encountered yet.
So that's the positive side
underlying hoarding behavior.
And that's why if
you feel like you've
gathered a whole
bunch of stuff-- oh,
I don't have time to
read this magazine,
but I'm going to
save it for later.
And even if it's
two years old, it's
like something is stopping
you from throwing it
into the trash.
>>LISA: When I'm
faced with death,
I'm going to need the magazine.
>>WALDMAN: Because
there's a primitive part
of your brain saying there
is knowledge in there
that will help me
to survive better.
And so we hang onto it.
We have to work a little
harder to let go of something
old to make room
for something new.
>>LISA: Understanding
this is so powerful.
Just knowing how the brain
works and giving us a window
into how our own
brains work will
help this curb these
types of behaviors,
extreme behaviors, because we
do realize we're not in the cave
any longer and we do live in
modern society a little easier.
>>WALDMAN: There's three
fundamental disconnects.
And so what I'd like everyone
to really understand,
these lower brain processes
that are taking place,
these are instinctual.
This happens before awareness.
But the dopamine literally,
like I said, wakes us up.
It brings consciousness online.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WALDMAN: But all
of our consciousness
now is based on the old memories
that we have and distillations
from things that we
saw a few seconds ago.
So our conscious
perception of the world
is very different from how
the back part of our brain
has processed the world.
And how our back part of
the brain has processed
the world has nothing to
do with the world that's
really out there.
For example, there's
no color in the world.
You're not wearing blue.
Blue is an imagination
that's being dissected
in the visual cortex
and then reconstructed
in our frontal cortex.
The best guess that we have
is that the movie we see,
everything that we
think we are seeing,
is again taking place
in this little two
tiny areas in the
front of our brain.
It's not even connected to
with what we're really seeing,
with what we're really feeling.
And that's not
connected to what's
really going on
outside in the world.
And the most amazing
thing is that it works.
Look what we've done
with our imagination,
look what we've done.
>>LISA: But how come
you and I both see blue?
>>WALDMAN: Because our brains
are wired somewhat the same
when it comes to
color processing.
>>LISA: But there's blue
in the fabric of my shirt.
>>WALDMAN: No, there isn't.
>>LISA: I don't agree.
>>WALDMAN: I understand.
>>LISA: There's a color
combination of yellow and green
that puts the blue into--
>>WALDMAN: There are a
light waves in the world.
You'll agree with that, correct?
>>LISA: OK.
>>WALDMAN: Now, we
can't see light waves.
You ever seen a light wave?
>>LISA: Stars?
[LAUGHTER] Yeah.
>>WALDMAN: We don't
see light waves.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WALDMAN: Color does
not exist in the world.
Just open up your kid's high
school biology textbook.
It's right there, in fact.
But people always
drop their jaw.
What you mean there's no color?
If I hold up a
blue-green card here
and I hold it next to
a green card over here,
you're going to
see this as blue.
And then I'm going to
remove that green card
and I'm going to hold
up a blue card here.
And you're going to
see that as green.
I'll go back and
forth and you're
going to feel like
you're losing your mind.
>>LISA: Un-huh.
And it has nothing to do
with the eyes or the way
that the eyes are wired?
>>WALDMAN: Not only that,
but color is word dependent.
So if you don't assign a
particular word to a color,
you might not be able to
recognize it so clearly.
And there are
cultures in the world
who see a slightly different
color spectrum than we see.
But you can train
yourself to see them.
So because we have the
same delusional minds,
we can create the same
delusional reality.
And because we all
agree that that's
the delusional reality
that exists out there,
we don't question the fact that
that might actually be a lie.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>WALDMAN: The
brain doesn't care.
It just wants to survive.
It wants to have more pleasure
and it wants more of that.
>>LISA: All right.
So it takes me to
the place of looking
at the language
centers of the brain.
So if you could explain
what are the language
centers of the brain,
when we talk about that?
>>WALDMAN: We have dozens of
language centers in the brain.
And on this particular
slide, you're
looking at a couple of them.
You have several in
your temporal lobe.
So for example, words that are
coming in through your ears,
they're processed by specific
types of language centers
that we're again unconscious of.
We then have the words that
we read on a piece of paper.
Those are different language
centers, and the words
that we read or being associated
with memories and patterns
from the past.
And then we have
language centers
that are involved
with speech itself.
And these are the ones that
are much closer to frontal lobe
consciousness.
What I want everyone
to understand
is that there's all
kinds of dialogues,
all kinds of specific
word-based languages going
on in different
parts of the brain.
And the rest of the brain only
sends little tiny snippets
of information into
frontal lobe consciousness,
to be precise four
chunks of information.
So if I was to say
to you, your brain
can only hold four
chunks of information,
you can repeat
back that sentence.
>>LISA: I'd be in trouble.
Because I need more.
>>WALDMAN: Right.
But I'll bet you cannot say
with any degree of accuracy,
a single sentence that I've
said prior to this moment.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>WALDMAN: Why not?
>>LISA: Because you
told me to say my brain
can only handle four
pieces of information.
>>WALDMAN: Because not only
will it only hold four chunks--
and this is why when you speak
too long to your partner,
it's a mistake.
We have what's called
the 10-second rule.
If you really want to have
an intimate conversation
with anyone, speak
slowly like this,
one sentence for 10
seconds, pause, stop, relax.
>>LISA: That would
never work with me.
>>WALDMAN: And you
take a deep breath.
That would never work with me.
And then I would say,
have you ever tried that?
And you would say?
>>LISA: No.
>>WALDMAN: Would you
like to try that?
>>LISA: I might fall asleep.
>>WALDMAN: I bet that you won't.
>>LISA: You're probably right.
That's what my husband
tells me at least.
>>WALDMAN: I'll bet you--
that was two sentences-- I'll
bet you $10,000 that the
exact opposite will happen.
And you have a whole
audience out there of people.
And I will write you
a check for this.
If you speak one slow
sentence to your husband,
take a deep breath
and relax-- this
is "What Words Can Change
Your Brain" is all about.
This is what I go around
the world training people
how to do.
And businesses love it because
that one slow sentence, I stop.
Then you just
intuitively respond.
If you come from
left field, I know
you won't even have
heard what I said.
Why should I even
waste my words?
But this is enough information
for you to hang on to.
You say something back.
You do this exercise.
I have a CD that trains a
person to take that, through it.
And within four minutes,
about 25% of the audience--
we may have 200 people in the
audience paired up, doing this.
One slow sentence,
breathe, relax.
Intuitively respond,
breathe, and relax.
Tears are running down
individuals' faces.
I'm about to go down to a
conference of attorneys,
mediating attorneys, because
I teach the whole Southern
California attorney
system how to do
this type of communication.
And you have two highly
conflicted individuals.
And in mediation, if you have
one sentence in 10 seconds,
you're not going to get
emotionally wrapped up in that.
You give another.
The next person says a response.
The attorney says one sentence.
In 20 minutes, we
can solve problems
that normally take two to
three hours of mediation.
And so money wise
that translates
from a $2,000 problem
into a $200 problem.
>>LISA: Absolutely fascinating.
So you had talked to me about
big ideas in the brain--
>>WALDMAN: Oh, yes.
>>LISA: --and how big ideas
really change the brain.
And what we're
taking a look at here
is the frontal
thalamic connection.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: Is that where
the big ideas exist?
>>WALDMAN: This is
the most amazing thing
about frontal lobe
consciousness.
The more I immerse myself
in an idea, a value
that I hold really important,
a goal that I really
want to achieve--
and by the way,
it's very, very important
to be able to visualize it.
If you can't have a picture
of what your big idea is,
the lower part of your brain
won't know how the respond.
It doesn't get turned on.
It just sounds like it.
And so for something like peace,
that's kind of interesting.
You have to do a
little extra work.
You have to visualize
peaceful scenarios, scenes
that create that.
You might want to
imagine yourself sitting
with a very incredible, peaceful
expression on your face.
>>LISA: What about love?
>>WALDMAN: The same with love.
>>LISA: Same thing.
>>WALDMAN: You need a picture.
With the picture, now
your brain gets pleasure
from that picture.
That dopamine raises
consciousness.
The frontal lobe
processes now can
create strategies to
move towards that goal.
As long as your
brain knows that you
were moving towards the goal,
more dopamine gets released.
That's what keeps you
going throughout your goal.
Again, bring in the slightest
negative thought, "oh,
maybe I won't succeed."
And then what you are
seeing in this picture,
I have that thought.
Maybe I won't succeed.
That information
is sent into one
of the deeper parts
of the brain here.
This is the thalamus.
The thalamus, most
people used to think just
processes sensory information.
So something you see,
or hear, or smell,
it goes to the thalamus.
And you can see all
of the connections
that the thalamus
sends this information
to all the rest of the
parts of the brain.
But the thalamus deals
with every thought
you have as if it's a
real sensation coming in
from the outside world.
It does not distinguish between
imagination and reality.
So if you imagine you're going
to be successful at achieving
any goal that brings you a sense
of pleasure and satisfaction,
that information goes
out to your brain,
boom, a great
release of dopamine.
Suddenly you find
yourself climbing out
of your chair to go do that
because your lower brain is
greedy and selfish and hungry.
And it wants more of that thing
called peace, or happiness,
or success in any way
you want to imagine it.
>>LISA: Is that kind of how the
law of attraction might work?
>>WALDMAN: This is the
neurological law of attraction.
>>LISA: Attraction.
>>WALDMAN: So in
your mind, whatever
you think, the
rest of your brain
is going to assume
that that's reality.
>>LISA: Hm.
That is true.
>>WALDMAN: And again, the
slightest negative thought
causes a bit of a
frown in your face.
And the moment another
human being sees--
remember when I said that
words were number eight?
Number one is facial expression.
And Paul Ekman has identified
10,000 facial expressions.
But there's only one
facial expression
that creates
instantaneous trust.
And this is what we describe in
a whole chapter of this book.
And so we created one
specific exercise.
And this is what we teach on
day one, class number one,
to all of the executive MBA
students at Loyola Marymount
University.
We ask a person to close their
eyes, take a deep breath,
relax.
And ask them, what is your
deepest, innermost value?
And we ask them
to do this for one
minute, every
morning for 10 days.
Many people will say
what kind of New Age
hocus pocus BS is this?
Well, BS can be brain
science, or not.
But by about day five--
we've done this now
for four years--
90% of the students
say this exercise should be
taught to every MBA student
across America.
Because what we
found happened is
that by focusing for one
minute on what your deepest,
innermost value is for that
day, it reduces the stress
throughout the whole
rest of the work day.
And executive MBA
students-- these
are people already running
$1 million, $10 million,
$100 million companies.
They're working 10,
12, 14 hours a day.
>>LISA: Um-huh.
Um-huh.
>>WALDMAN: And for one person,
the word that came up for them,
their deepest value was family.
And by doing that
exercise-- he was a CEO--
he realized it wasn't
worthwhile spending
12 hours in the office.
So he cut back three hours
and devoted those three hours
to his sacred value.
This is your own
inner spirituality.
Your inner values is
your own inner religion.
Because we all have spiritual
circuits in our brain
that are based upon
our highest ideals
that take us beyond the
moment to moment happiness
to the deeper levels
of satisfaction.
>>LISA: And this is how
you spend 12 minutes a day
discovering your greatest value.
And that helps you
get rid of anxiety.
If your value is health, that
can help you with weight loss.
If your value is
spirituality, that
can help you with relationships.
It's across the board this way.
It's fascinating.
>>WALDMAN: Eating, yeah,
eating is wonderful.
If you-- in slow motion-- you
take a look at meditation.
What's involved in meditation?
Many times you're just
slowing down the process.
So if you slowly
picked up your fork
and you slowly took a small
piece of food onto the fork,
and then you study
it, and you watch it,
and you observe it,
and then hold it
on your tongue for
20 seconds, you'll
discover incredible
sensations and flavors
you never noticed before.
>>LISA: Will you actually
get full faster that way?
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
This will actually satiate
because so much pleasure
is being released.
The brain, again, works
on the pleasure principle.
What normally we'd
be doing, we're
eating so fast, oh, there's
a bowl chocolate ice cream.
I love chocolate ice cream.
You're gobbling it down.
All you're doing is
eating your memory.
You're not taking the
time to really experience
the color, the shape,
the textures, the tones.
By slowing things
down and meditating
on a single morsel
of food-- we've
done the first brain scan study
at University of Pennsylvania,
Andy Newberg and I. And you
can see deep down in your brain
a part of the caudate
nucleus that gives you
more conscious control
over what you want to eat.
You have more power to choose
to eat what you really want.
And now you can use your
sensation and pleasure senses
to eat what you really like.
And the more you
immerse yourself
into what gives you the
most amount of pleasure,
the less you eat because
you get satisfied quicker.
>>LISA: Faster.
Most of us eat at our desks,
or driving, fast foods.
That pleasure center of the
brain is never stimulated.
>>WALDMAN: We
forget how important
that momentary pleasure is.
>>LISA: So this is dieting
through mind control.
I like it.
That works.
All right.
So now on the
opposite side, what
happens in the brain when
fear is simulated and pain
is stimulated.
>>WALDMAN: Well,
that's why I want
you to take a look at this next
slide that we have up here.
These are the actual
neural connections
from the visual cortex.
So if you see an unpleasant
picture, which could simply
be your spouse frowning
at you or whatever else,
or somebody's just anxious about
something, or whatever else,
these tiny
micro-expressions is enough.
And you can see that the
neural circuits actually
go all the way down into
the center of the brain.
And there's a little
tiny part of the brain
there called the amygdala.
And in Greek, "amygdala"
stands for almond.
And that is the part of your
brain that makes you go nuts.
So this sends sends
out a warning system
saying stop, potential danger.
And it sits right next to the--
motivation center starts right
at that point where
that green line ends.
So that literally turns off the
motivation center that quickly.
So it's on, off, on, off.
Bring in a pleasurable
image, the pain,
fear circuit gets turned off.
And now focus on a
pleasurable image, somebody
that you deeply
love and care for.
The more you hold
that image, you'll
see a Mona Lisa smile
form along in your face.
This is a whole separate
chapter that we do on that.
And that half smile is what
will make the other person
neurologically trust you
the moment they see it.
>>LISA: That is the image.
How fascinating.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
And those are
involuntary muscles.
So again, the exercise
is very simple.
Just take a minute to think
about somebody you deeply
love and care for or an
event that brings you
deep satisfaction from the past.
That memory is enough to
create that half smile.
You'll feel that pleasurable
release of dopamine.
The other person's
brain-- and this
is called neural resonance.
This is the way in which
we understand each other.
Your brain will begin to fire
in the way my brain is firing.
And so if I'm having
pleasurable, loving,
compassionate thoughts,
the same circuits
will begin to fire
in your brain.
Then we'll literally be
on the same brainwave.
>>LISA: That's what that means.
And that's why the Mona
Lisa smile is so popular
is because it's such an
affirming, peaceful look.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: All right.
So what happens when the brain
gets confused, and diffused,
and scattered, and
ADD, and all of that?
What does that look
like, lack of focus?
>>WALDMAN: This is the
other important thing
that we've just discovered
about the frontal lobes.
It looks like the
right frontal lobe
spends a lot of
its time processing
negative fantasies, so your
self-doubts, your worries
and fears.
These are just
imaginary thoughts.
Well, what if this went wrong?
What if that went wrong?
>>LISA: Un-huh.
>>WALDMAN: Now with
that information,
your left frontal lobe should be
saying well if that went wrong,
I could do A, B, C,
and D. So it looks
like your left frontal
lobe is the optimist
and your right frontal
lobe is more the pessimist.
>>LISA: The problem is that
the right frontal lobe gets
more exercise than
the left, by having
negative thinking and
shame, blame, guilt, fear.
>>WALDMAN: We don't have
enough information to say that.
But again, what we have
found from the meditation
studies, and
particularly the studies
by Ritchie Davidson at the
University of Wisconsin,
is that we see that
people who are doing
meditations focusing
on self-love,
and kindness, and
generosity and virtually
any form of gentle,
imaginary, or concentration--
even yoga, for example,
you get the same kind
of brain simulation going on.
We see an increase in
the right frontal lobes.
So we know that positivity
is beginning to be built.
And we see stimulation going
on in some of the newest
centers of the brain like
the anterior cingulate, which
is where compassion and
empathy begin to emerge.
>>LISA: And so in
brain diffusion--
this is where the slide
that we're looking at here--
is the right and
left communicating?
>>WALDMAN: Well, these are
new types of brain images
that are called brain
diffusion images.
So what we're doing
is being able to learn
how to actually map how
the connections from one
part of the brain, how
those neurons send out axons
and connect to other
parts of the brain.
And this is just
another image showing
how one small part of the
brain sends out information
to the whole rest of your brain.
>>LISA: And we have actually a
moving image of this as well,
where you can see--
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: --from
different perspectives
what this looks like.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
So here you're actually
seeing the activity
that's going on in
your left hemisphere,
in specific, how it
connects through it, how
it weaves over and connects
with different parts going on.
And every different
activity that you do
is going to create a
different type of picture.
And again, remember even these
pictures, which should totally
change the way you've ever
looked at the brain before,
is not an accurate
picture because this
looks like this is how
your brain is wired.
So I want you to throw away
forever the word "wiring"
and substitute a brand new
word called "programming."
Because neural plasticity
is the new name of the game.
>>LISA: Oh.
This is what we get to see now.
I'm really excited about that.
These next images are what
neural plasticity actually is
and what it looks
like in the brain.
And you say that we have
creatures in our brain
that are actually neurons.
>>WALDMAN: Oh my God, yes.
So in this first one,
I want to tell you
first of all we used to
think that there were
100 billion neurons
in the brain.
And we thought they
were kind of hard wired
and they kind of just
did the same thing.
Now we find out that
they are constantly
moving around
throughout your brain.
And at birth, they
can actually move
from the back part of the
brain to the front part
of your brain.
And different parts
continue to change.
Every time you
recall a memory, you
have a different connection.
You're never recalling
the same memory twice.
But we also have what's
called glial cells.
And "glial" used to mean glue.
But here I want to
see in this picture,
you can actually see
that these glial cells
are moving around neurons.
And they're fixing them.
They're healing.
They're kind of like
their personal masseuse.
They're massaging these neurons.
They're helping them
have more energy.
They're recirculating some
of the neurotransmitters.
They are the helper
cells in our brain.
And each one of our neurons and
each one of these glial cells
has a mind of its own.
It can learn new behaviors.
You can teach it to
learn new tricks,
move forward in the world.
You can traumatize it.
You can teach how to be
afraid of the environment.
>>LISA: And all that is
done through our thoughts--
>>WALDMAN: All of that
it is done-- yeah.
>>LISA: --and our environment.
>>WALDMAN: We can do that
through our thoughts.
And Eric Kandel won the
Nobel Prize in medicine
for taking a single
sea slug neuron
and showing that you can train
it to learn or traumatize it.
And this is true for every
neuron in your brain.
>>LISA: And we get
to see some of this.
>>WALDMAN: This is
very, very important.
Here you're actually
seeing neurons
over a period of a few
hours actually reach
out, connect with other neurons.
So these are live
living creatures.
These are a community of people.
You need to treat each
one of your neurons
as if it has a mind of its
own, a life of its own.
>>LISA: So these
neurons are connecting.
And this is what
neural plasticity is.
>>WALDMAN: Correct.
>>LISA: And these are connecting
through thoughts, habits,
patterns, environment,
old memories.
>>WALDMAN: You damage one
part of your brain, the area
next to your brain is going
to start growing neurons
and connections in to try to
take over the function that
was lost, after a
stroke for example.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So can you actually
ever regrow those cells
that are damaged from stroke?
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
And that's what
we're working on now.
And the other cool
thing, and I'm
sure you've seen it in the
news, we can now put electrodes
into your brain
and these neurons
can connect with
those electrodes
to control a robotic
arm, or a computer,
and thought processes,
or whatever else.
So you can use your
thoughts to communicate.
You could be locked in.
You may have lost all ability
to move your body, to speak.
Put a probe into the right
place and now you can actually
move cursors on a
computer and communicate
to the outside world.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
It's just so fascinating to me.
I had a brain injury and I
damaged the prefrontal right
cortex of my brain.
And I was able to rebuild
it, through EEG though.
So it was doing just that.
It's a combination of EEG
working with neuroscience
and stimulating different
parts of the brain.
Now, I get to actually see
what the EEG was doing.
>>WALDMAN: When you had
that damage by the way,
did you notice any shift between
positive and negative thinking?
Did you feel happier or sadder.
>>LISA: I was just
thinking about that.
Yes, I lost my memory.
And so when I went through that
memory loss, I was in a blissed
out state.
>>WALDMAN: Because it was to
your right prefrontal lobe.
>>LISA: I damaged the
negative side of my brain.
>>WALDMAN: If it
was the left, you
might have had a much--
you might be living more
in a nightmare.
>>LISA: Thank goodness.
It's fascinating.
Because I realized it helped
me look towards optimistically
rebuilding my brain.
And so I damaged the
negative center of the brain.
>>WALDMAN: And that's
what we do with our books,
and with our CDs,
and programs is
that we take the exercises
that we know so that you
can stimulate more of your
left frontal lobe processing.
Because that's where the
optimism and the decision
making takes place, in
creating a better balance.
And use other exercises so that
you get more activity and flow
going in key parts
of your brain.
>>LISA: I don't suggest
anyone to damage
your negative center
of your brain.
However, it is one
of the reasons why
I'm so committed to
getting positivity
and consciousness
into the world.
Fascinating.
>>WALDMAN: Every time you start
worrying and doubting yourself,
you're damaging your brain.
>>LISA: All right.
Oh.
>>WALDMAN: And understand that
those worries and fears have
nothing to do with
the present moment.
The easiest solution
to this, the next time
you find yourself being upset
about something, take a look.
You'll see that you're
pulling a memory from the past
and you're projecting
it onto the future.
I'm about to go home and tell
my wife that I dented her car.
Oh, no, how is she
going to react?
Is she going to get mad?
Maybe I said the
wro-- Take a moment.
Take a deep breath, relax,
come into the present moment.
None of that has happened.
You don't know how your
wife is going to respond.
If you walk in through
the door and you're
filled with profound
love because you've
train yourself to do this
in the present moment,
your wife is going to
feel empathy for you
and that will temper
her hurt and pain
that you dented her car.
>>LISA: So it really
is as simple as taking
a deep breath and retraining.
When I get the images of what it
actually looks like-- sometimes
when I'm driving home
after a long day at work,
about two exits
before my exit, I
start to have anxiety about what
the house looks like, and got
to deal with the
homework, and cook dinner.
And I get pretty--
>>WALDMAN: So try this exercise
and try it for seven days.
Each time you drive home
consciously choose--
and by the way,
traffic is great.
I always love what
Tetnal Han said.
The traffic gets all stopped up
and you see those red lights,
let that red light be
a reminder to stop,
take a deep breath in, come
into the present moment.
If you're going
80 miles an hour,
you can't notice the
beautiful surroundings,
the trees that are on the side.
We have beautiful
freeways in LA compared
to the rest of the world.
>>LISA: There's a lot
of tree-lined freeways.
Yes.
>>WALDMAN: Drive
home and imagine
all the wonderful,
pleasurable, enjoyable things
that you can and will
do when you go home.
And keep filling
yourself with that.
You'll feel so incredible
when you walk into the door.
And then you'll find
out that your spouse
hasn't done that at all.
And you'll will need
all that loving kindness
to help pull them.
You'll have a neural war
going on, neural dissonance.
You want them to resonate to
your peaceful and happiness.
And you can do that as long as
you stay in the present moment.
Focus on the
wonderful sensations
that are always taking place.
Your worries, fears,
and doubts, 90% of them
are totally imaginary.
And we've learned how
to interrupt this--
because I do what's
called neurocoaching.
And I can take a person
in less than an hour
and often times get rid of
10, 20 years of a bad belief
system.
>>LISA: Because you
know how the brain works
and what it looks like.
So we're getting the opportunity
to take a look at these images
now.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
This is really one
of my favorites.
>>LISA: This is what we're
talking about right now, right?
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
So what you're seeing
is how a neuron
decides to send out
axons to connect
with other neurons going on.
So these are actual film of
what are called neurites.
These are very young neurons.
Because we see the most
amount of movement taking
place in the brain
when we are young.
Most of your brain
is not very active.
And it's just incredible how
they connect and disconnect
all time.
When you understand that,
you'll understand that you never
recall the same memory twice.
And if you have
a negative memory
and you recall it while you
remain peaceful, happy, focused
on your deepest
innermost values,
that's what gets embedded
into that memory.
That goes back into storage.
And the next time something
triggers that memory,
you'll also bring up
a bit of the memory
of that peacefulness.
So our research shows that if
you spend one minute an hour
throughout the day-- that's
about 12 minutes a day or just
do 12 minutes of
meditation solidly--
but we find a lot of people
just don't like to do that.
So we think that you can do just
a bunch of short meditations
throughout the day.
We think that's actually
better because then you
get in the habit of always
training yourself to come
into the present
moment, feel refreshed.
This is what's being taught
at Harvard Business School
and at our school.
12 minutes a day,
eight weeks later
we see not only the beginnings
of major functional changes
taking place in
their brain, we see
structural changes taking place.
And in advanced mediators, you
can see functional changes,
in your frontal
lobe for example,
as high as 25% changes.
And in areas like
your thalamus, which
is shaping the reality in
which you think you live,
you can change it
by as much as 10%.
We can actually look at a human
brain now and see what goes on.
>>LISA: So that's
what we're doing
today, which is fascinating.
I love that you're
sharing this with us.
So now, what is this?
What are we looking at here?
>>WALDMAN: Here you're
looking at an unhealthy neuron
and a healthy neuron.
And this healthy
neuron is trying
to connect with
this poor neuron.
And we all have that.
And it's just not
quite-- it just
isn't getting its act together.
So again, I think
it's fair to say
that if you look
in the human brain,
you see one of the most
amazing, cooperative communities
on the planet.
Neurons do not fight
with each other at all.
There's no hostility
going on in them.
>>LISA: They're always helping.
>>WALDMAN: They're
always helping.
>>LISA: Huh.
They're always
helping each other.
So they're always
helping grow, connect,
take care of the damaged ones.
>>WALDMAN: Create new
thoughts, seek new pleasures,
create greater satisfaction,
keep you driving through life
so that you have more of
both inner and outer wealth.
>>LISA: Could this be what a
goal looks like in the brain?
>>WALDMAN: The goal-- I have
a burst of pleasure going on
and my lower brain says
I want more of that.
Now, I have to use
my consciousness
to decide do I really
want more of that or not?
I mean obviously, if I'm
trying to lose weight
and I have a bowl of
ice cream over here
and a bowl of carrots over
here, I have a real problem.
A suggestion, get rid of the
image of the bowl of ice cream
because I know how my brain
is going to respond to that,
and go with what brings you
pleasure in terms of focusing
on what your weight
loss goal is.
So what we have to teach
our hedonistic brain
is how to anticipate
a future pleasure.
So always make sure for any
goal you have, large or small,
two things.
One is you want to
make sure that you
give constant little pleasurable
rewards, every hour of the day
throughout the day, as you
move towards that goal.
And then make sure you have
a really nice, big reward
that you know is
going to satisfy.
>>LISA: So the reward could be
the image of a healthy body.
The reward could be the image
of looking over the ocean
after you've bought the
ideal house of your dreams.
The reward could be how you
would look in that picture
that you take of
yourself or whatever.
Those are enough to
simulate the dopamine--
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: --and the reward
centers of the brain.
>>WALDMAN: The brain doesn't
care whether it's a big--
>>LISA: So visualization
is powerful.
>>WALDMAN: --or
a small pleasure.
We tend to forget that
pleasure is something
that is absolutely essential.
And unfortunately, some
spiritual scriptures,
they look at people who are
incredibly hedonistic and very
selfish.
And this is the
downside of pleasure.
The more pleasure I feel,
the more pleasure I want.
And it becomes me, me,
me, me, me, me, me, me.
Now social forces come in.
And we have social
circuits in the brain.
If we do not share our inner and
outer wealth with other people,
if we do not share our
kindness and generosity,
if we do not share our material
wealth and with others,
others feel envious and
they will punish us,
even at a loss for themselves.
So there is a very interesting
socioneurological process
that takes place.
And we are forced-- if we
act greedy, we get punished.
But there are ways of--
like even if you simply
keep repeating may I be
happy, may I be well,
may I filled with
love and peace.
May you be happy,
may you be well,
may you be filled
with love and peace.
May we be happy, may
we be well, may we
be filled with love and peace.
This turns out to
be one most powerful
neurological
meditations we've found.
This stimulates a
part of the brain that
allows us to feel deeper
empathy and compassion.
And this part of
your brain is barely
functional before the age of 30.
>>LISA: Oh, isn't
that interesting.
This could actually be the
secret to anti-aging as well.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
Yes.
>>LISA: So this
slide shows us the--
>>WALDMAN: So here's
a single neuron.
And this neuron, this
is a very simple neuron.
It only has about maybe 10 or
12 axons at the tip going on.
And if you look closely, you can
actually see within the neuron,
there's all kinds
of flow going on.
There's all kinds of
neuroelectrical and
neurochemical activity going on.
And that information
worked its way to the tips.
And then the tips decide how
to connect with other neurons
to pass that information on.
>>LISA: So those--
that is actually
a memory that could be started.
And those little tentacles reach
out and connect with another--
>>WALDMAN: Correct.
>>LISA: --neuron,
which forms a bridge.
>>WALDMAN: Right.
A memory is going to be
a collection of those.
And so we are at the
point that we now
know we can begin to extinguish
negative memories if we catch
them within the first 24 hours.
So we take a
traumatic event and we
do various forms of positive
thinking and neutralizing.
Sometimes just sitting back
and watching our thoughts,
and watching a
negative reaction,
while we stay deeply relaxed,
is enough to extinguish
the formation of
a negative memory.
>>LISA: One of the
most powerful things
that you said to me is
that negative words can
damage the brain.
>>WALDMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: And we actually have
an example of what that looks
like, of what a negative
thought, or word, or pattern--
>>WALDMAN: Well, the first
slide that we're showing here
is just-- another thing,
I want to show you
that glial cells, again, they
give birth to themselves.
So you're actually seeing
procreation take place
with some of the most
important cells in our brain.
And again, we tend
to always think
about neurons--
this is well known
in the scientific community, but
not in the general community--
that these glial cells,
these are living creatures
that we want to respect,
and nurture, and encourage
their growth and development.
>>LISA: How do we
get more glial cells?
>>WALDMAN: These types
of meditation exercises,
these kinds of optimistic
forms of thinking,
affirmations, the things
that Andy and I have
talked about in these two books.
This is the documentation
of how we do that.
If we choose how we communicate,
in a slow, relaxed, positive
way, we're helping each other
grow a thicker neocortex.
And the cool thing
about these meditations,
it actually shrinks
the amygdala,
that fear processing
part of your brain.
>>LISA: Hm.
Interesting.
And I'm sure
electromagnetically,
those types of thoughts go
out and emanate beyond you.
>>WALDMAN: So here's what
happens if you really
want to meditate
on a negative word.
There you actually see, up in
the upper part of the screen,
and we'll show it a
couple of times here,
this is a neuron dying.
It's literally implodes.
That's the end of its life.
>>LISA: And that's
what a negative thought
would do to the brain.
>>WALDMAN: Can do, yes.
>>LISA: Can do.
It is how negative thoughts
can damage the brain.
>>WALDMAN: Right.
And the longer you
ruminate on negativity,
the more you can become
neurologically entrapped in it.
Sometimes I think some people
who are just rageoholics.
>>LISA: Have brain cells
exploding, imploding
all the time.
>>WALDMAN: We're not going
to be able to help them.
And sociopaths, there's
benign sociopaths.
There's a fundamental
disconnect.
They have lots of creative
ideas, how to make more money.
I mean I do think
that it's fair to say
that a good portion of
what we see on Wall Street
are sociopathic
CEOs, who are driven
to make more and
more and more money.
And many of these people
we find in brain scans,
they cannot feel that what
they are doing hurts other
individuals.
They don't get it.
>>LISA: Hm.
So that's why when some
people go and they experience
meditation, they
can never go back
to that old way of
being because they've
awakened different
parts of the brain.
And they're repairing
their brain.
>>WALDMAN: And
there's a problem too
because anger gives you
the illusion that you're
being rational when
it's the exact opposite.
So anger totally
undermines the ability
to feel empathy
towards anyone else.
And it undermines your
ability to think clearly.
That's why when you
get angry, you not only
kill the other
person, but you're
killing yourself as well.
>>LISA: So the bottom
line from everything
that I've learned
from you here is
the power, the absolute power
of visualization, meditation,
positive imagery.
And you can literally repair
the damage of brain cells.
And for every one
negative word that
is said or spoken or
heard, three positives
would actually come back.
>>WALDMAN: At a
bare minimum, push
that positivity ratio
to five or seven.
Consciously work on--
even lying to yourself--
this is a wonderful world,
this is a wonderful world.
As that earlier drawing
showed, that information
goes to the thalamus, the
thalamus says, world safe,
world wonderful.
It sends that message to
the rest of your brain.
It's your choice, negative
world, positive world.
Both of these are
fantasies created
by left and right frontal lobe.
Which illusion and
which fantasy do you
choose to live your life in?
>>LISA: Hm.
Good point.
Thank you so much, Mark.
You are just a fountain
of information.
I appreciate your knowledge
and sharing with all of us.
I really do.
>>WALDMAN: And please share
this with everyone else.
So this is a totally
new model of the brain.
We need to get the word out.
We need to let people know
how powerful affirmations,
positive thinking is.
How important pleasure is.
How easy it is to use
repetitious forms of exercises
that have been drawn from the
world's spiritual traditions.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WALDMAN: And you can--
>>LISA: And share this
with your friends as well.
Thank you.
>>WALDMAN: --add two
extra years to your life.
Optimism will add--
>>LISA: We didn't
talk about that.
>>WALDMAN: --two
years to your life.
>>LISA: Thank you so
much for joining me.
And as Mark said, please
share this interview
with your friends.
You can do that by
going to gaiamtv.com,
and I thank you so
much for being here.
Until next time, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]